Magic
Magic in Elthelas
Forces of Magic
<p>
  In our world we are familiar with the 4 fundamental forces.  The strong nuclear force, weak nuclear force, electromagnetic force, and gravitational force.  These forces account for everything in our universe.  In the universe of Elthelas and D&amp;D there are additional forces that act on the universe, namely, the divine force, and the arcane force.
</p>
<h4>The Arcane Force</h4>
<p>
  The arcane force is emitted by arcanum, a rare material that is in fact a unique subatomic particle that is attracted to itself, and reacts to intentionality (a manifestation of the divine force) by emitting forces of its own on standard matter.  Most of the universes arcanum is noninteractive, and forms a barrier between the many "planes" of existence.  It is theorized that in ancient days the Gods built these walls of Arcanum to create greater order in the universe by separating arcanum from ordinary matter, allowing the divine force to act without causing unpredictable side effects.  However, philosophers have postulated that this theory may have a fundamental flaw, as the large collection of divine force necessary to form a God would have created massive chain reactions in a universe where Arcanum was more evenly distributed, likely dispersing the divine force in the process.
</p>
<p>
  Most accessible arcanum in the universe is found in crystal-like deposits.  Sometimes these deposits are buried in rock, sometimes they are free-floating, and on occasion they even fall from space.  Gravity appears to act on the deposits normally, but the other forces can have unpredictable results on a deposit of Arcanum.  Wizards have learned how to focus their divine soul to interact with arcanum deposits to produce predictable results, typically through a series of spoken chants and gestures, and sometimes by introducing other forms of matter that the arcane force can act on. The ability to produce increasingly powerful effects requires increasingly large deposits of arcanum (although it is not consumed in the process) however, repeated use of an arcanum crystal attracts free particles of arcanum, incrementally increasing the size of the crystal, and allowing more powerful magic to be cast with it (in game this is represented through a wizard or other arcane casters experience level).  Certain creatures and people have arcanum in their blood (such as dragons and sorcerers) this allows them to produce magical effects without an outside source of arcanum, but because they cannot inscribe on the arcanum, the number of effects they are able to produce is limited by the power of their divine spark. It is common practice among the bardic colleges to artificially infuse the blood with a small amount of arcanum so that the student can produce effects to dazzle and awe their audiences.
</p>
<p>
  Because Arcanum is self-attractive, events of massive magical significance can cause arcanum to congregate in a particular area. This leaves the area prone to strange occurrances. Occasionally some of the arcanum attracted leaks from the planar boundaries themselves, introducing new raw arcanum to the material plane, and a weak point into the boundary between worlds, often manifested as a portal or through the random passing back and forth of creatures between planes at that location.
</p>
<h4>The Divine Force</h4>
<p>
  The divine force is the manifestation of life itself, and can be generative or destructive, manifested in positive and negative energy.  The divine force has a unique ability to interact with organic compounds, causing them to react in a predictable (though complex) manner.  Every living thing is endowed with a certain amount of divine force.  The Gods are beings endowed with massive amounts of divine force.  The divine force is self-replenishing with time, such that creatures that use the divine force to produce some effect are drained for a time, but gain it back.  The divine force can also be granted to others (with training) although this weakens the one who grants it slightly.  Most mortals would die if they gave away their divine force, however, Gods give it to their chosen clerics and paladins regularly.  Druids and rangers draw divine force in small amounts from living things around them in the world, such as plants and animals.
</p>
<p>
  Both the negative and positive divine forces can be used to grant or destroy life, however they naturally repel one another. Further, it has been found that whether ones soul acts with the negative or positive force is determined by the sorts of things one does.  This has created the natural 'good', 'evil' dichotomy in the universe, as those who choose 'evil' acts emit a force that is naturally repulsive towards those who commit 'good' acts, however in most cases the force is too weak to act at any distance from the individual, and thus this repulsion is undetectable by normal means.
</p>